Add design history for the image reading session overview (#492)
NHSDigital/prevention-services-design-history: app/manage-breast-screening/2026/05/image-reading-session-overview/index.md

---
title: Helping image readers see their progress during a session
description: Designing a clear image reading session overview for image readers
date: 2026-05-06
author: Rebecca Cottrell
opengraphImage:
  src: /manage-breast-screening/2026/05/image-reading-session-overview/mid-session.png
  alt: 
tags:
  - beta
  - prototype
  - image reading
---

> We've been looking at how to give image readers an overview of their reading session so they can review their opinions, and how the session 'container' should work. We've also settled on 'session' as the right term, rather than batch, list, or similar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've been looking at how to give image readers an overview of their reading session so they can review their opinions, and how the session 'container' should work. We've also settled on 'session' as the preferred term for reading a selection of cases, rather than batch, list, or similar.
```

> For more about the image reading process, see our previous design histories: [understanding image reading](https://design-history.prevention-services.nhs.uk/manage-breast-screening/2025/04/understanding-image-reading/), and [reading in batches](https://design-history.prevention-services.nhs.uk/manage-breast-screening/2026/02/reading-in-batches/). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more about the image reading process, see our previous design histories: [understanding image reading](/manage-breast-screening/2025/04/understanding-image-reading/), and [reading in batches](/manage-breast-screening/2026/02/reading-in-batches/). 
```

Domain relative links

> ## Sessions and the in-progress session 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Populating sessions with cases 
```

> The image reading session is a container for a number of cases that the image reader intends to read, for example 25 cases. During the session, the image reader looks at each case and gives an opinion. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The image reading session is a container for a number of cases that the image reader intends to read. Our prototype default is 25 cases, but users may have options to customise this. During the session, the image reader looks at each case and gives an opinion. 
```

> If cases were assigned to a reader all at once, any reader who walked away mid-session could leave a block of cases locked and unavailable to others. To prevent this, only one case is locked at a time, assigned to the image reader at the point it's needed. This means the full session list isn't known in advance, but ensures cases remain available to other readers until the moment they're being read.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If cases were assigned to a reader all at once, any reader who walked away mid-session could leave a block of cases locked and unavailable to others. To prevent this, we're proposing that cases are added to a session one case at a time, assigned to the image reader at the point it's being read. This means the full session list isn't set in advance, which keeps cases available to other readers.
```

## Session in progress

> While a session is in progress, the image reader can see an overview of cases they've read in that session, and the opinion they've given on each case. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While a session is active, the image reader can see an overview of cases they've read in that session so far, and the opinion they've given on each case. 
```

> The image reader can see cases represented as a list: previously read, current, and future cases. The future cases are implied graphically using numbered blocks. The current case (meaning no opinion has been given yet) is indicated with a different colour background, and the image reader can resume from this place in the list. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The image reader can see cases represented as a list containing previously read, current, and future cases. The future cases are implied graphically using numbered blocks. The current case (meaning no opinion has been given yet) is indicated with a different colour background, and the image reader can resume from this place in the list. 
```

![The in-progress session page shows a list of cases, with two previously read out of 8. The current case has a resume reading button.](mid-session.png)

## Session complete page 

> When the image reader has read all cases in their session, they're taken to the completed session page. This allows the image reader to see a list of their opinions for each case, along with the screening date and a tab where they can see opinions given for first and second read, along with a case outcome, if available.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the image reader has read all cases in their session, they're taken to the completed session page. This allows the image reader to see a list of their opinions for each case and a tab where they can see all case opinions, along with an outcome if available.  
```

![The session complete page shows a banner with options to finalise opinions, start a new session, and return to reading dashboard, and beneath this there is a mini statistics dashboard showing percent normal, technical recall, recall for assessment, and priors requested. Below this is the start of the session list..](completed-session.png)

> The image reader can also choose to 'finalise' their opinions early – meaning they can't change their mind. Once finalised, the case can be read by a second reader. They can also start a new image reading session from this point. 

Reviewer: Feel like this could do with a short explanation on keeping opinions open for a period of time.

Author: Want to add one? 😇

## Next steps 

> We'll need to do user research to see how well the designs meet user needs, and if any further iteration is needed. 

Reviewer: Worth mentioning what we're specifically seeking user feedback on? Eg:

- this is very different to how they currently read (by clinic case batch)...we want to know how this may affect their processes to have more fluid reading sessions
